--- page 3 ---
        Resilience Improvement Plan  
 
 
2 | P a g e  
 
List of Figures 
 
Figure 1: GDOT RIP Goals ................................ ................................ ................................ ........ 9 
Figure 2:  GDOT Emergency Project Spending (FY 2016- FY 2020) ................................ .........11 
Figure 3:  Total Estimated Emergency Spending ................................ ................................ ......11 
Figure 4:  Peer Review Inventory ................................ ................................ .............................. 14 
Figure 5 Projected Changes to Temperature Extremes at a 2°C (3.6°F) Increase in Global 
Temperatures ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................27 
Figure 6 Projected Changes to Precipitation Extremes at a 2°C (3.6°F) Increase in Global 
Temperatures ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................27 
Figure 7 Sea Level Trends (1993-2020) ................................ ................................ ....................28 
Figure 8 Projected Future Transportation Infrastructure Costs by Proactive Adaptation ............29 
Figure 9: Relationship Between Key Resilience Components ................................ ...................30 
Figure 10: Climate Hazard Exposure - Score Categories based on Hot Spot Analysis Results .31 
Figure 11:  Climate Hazard Exposure - Weights from Hazard-Asset Pairs with Failure 
Mechanisms ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................. 31 
Figure 12:  Factors for Estimating Criticality Score ................................ ................................ ....33 
Figure 13:  Asset Prioritization Matrix ................................ ................................ ........................34 
Figure 14: Vulnerability Results ................................ ................................ ................................ .36 
Figure 15: Risk Results ................................ ................................ ................................ .............37 
Figure 16: General Screening Approach ................................ ................................ ...................40 
Figure 17:  Primary Work Types Screening Tiers ................................ ................................ ......41 
 
List of Tables 
 
Table 1:  2050 SWTP/2021 SSTP Investment Categories ................................ ........................16 
Table 2:  Existing State Laws Associated with Resilience ................................ .........................23 
Table 3:  National Resilience Tools and Data ................................ ................................ ............24 
Table 4: RIP Performance Metrics ................................ ................................ ............................39 
Table 5:  Projects Recommended for PROTECT Funding (FY 24 – FY 34) .............................. 42 
Table 6.  Projects Approved for PROTECT funding by FHWA as of October 2024 ...................47 
 

--- page 4 ---
        Resilience Improvement Plan  
 
 
3 | P a g e  
 
Executive Summary 
The Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) is committed to building and maintaining 
transportation infrastructure designed to withstand  and/or rapidly recover from the impacts 
associated with hazard or extreme events. 
This Resilience Improvement Plan (RIP) establishes GDOT’s resilience goals; outlines existing 
resilience best practices, efforts, laws, and tools; assesses risk and vulnerability of the state’s 
transportation network; recommends resilience improvement policies and strategies; sets targets; 
and includes a prioritized list of projects eligible for Promoting Resilient Operations for 
Transformative, Efficient, and Cost-Saving Transportation (PROTECT) Formula Program funds.   
The plan was developed within the framework of the GDOT 2050 Statewide Transportation Plan 
/Statewide Strategic Transportation Plan (SWTP/SSTP) and aligned with the Transportation 
Asset Management Plan. This framework is as follows: 
FOUNDATIONAL 
 
 
• Reduce risk to transportation infrastructure, operations, disadvantaged 
populations, and aged individuals. 
• Determine which hazards pose the highest risk and the areas of those risks 
• Prioritize projects within high-risk/high hazard areas  
CATALYTIC 
 
• Ensure today’s investments meet tomorrow’s growth 
• Promote investments minimizing or reducing operational and response costs 
• Ensure investments are not creating new risks 
INNOVATION 
 
 
• Collaboration with federal and state partners to address and reduce 
transportation network risk 
• Build on vulnerability assessment and the Multi-Hazards Exposure and 
Vulnerability Analysis Tool (MHEVRA) to identify existing and future risks  
• Promote investments in natural infrastructure to minimize future risks  
 
Within the framework of these foundational, catalytic, and innovation goals, the state of Georgia’s 
infrastructure leads the nation.  Ranked #1 in the country and graded A+ for the best infrastructure 
by CNBC1, 98% of the bridges and 94% of the roadways in the state are in acceptable condition.  
The RIP will add an enhanced resilience lens in maintaining the state’s transportation assets. 
The plan development process included establishment of a Resiliency Committee, a peer review, 
and a detailed review of existing resilience policies, laws, and tools.  A focal point of the RIP is a 
Climate Vulnerability, Risk, and Resilience Assessment  of Georgia’s pavements, bridges, and 
culverts developed by Georgia Tech for GDOT as a research study.  
The RIP recommends strategies to increase the resilience of the transportation system.  The 
strategies address the planning process  through transportation system management and 
operations.  
 
1 https://www.cnbc.com/2023/07/18/these-are-americas-best-states-for-infrastructure.html 
 

--- page 5 ---
        Resilience Improvement Plan  
 
 
4 | P a g e  
 
The focus of the RIP is identifying vulnerabilities through a risk -based assessment and how the 
plan improves the ability to respond to events.  Performance metrics were developed based on 
the plan goals and findings from the Assessment.  These metrics will be used to track progress 
towards continuing to make the transportation system more resilient over time.  The metrics focus 
on the criticality of the infrastructure assets, which is the importance or value of the asset, in terms 
of the cost to users, owners, and society from a loss in function.  A critical asset is an asset that 
is so important to a study area that its removal would result in significant losses.  The metrics also 
focus on the vulnerability of the assets, which is the degree to which a system is susceptible to, 
or unable to handle the adverse effects of extreme weather events 
These performance measures are aligned with the foundational, catalytic, and innovati on goals 
identified for ensuring a resilient transportation system.  With the identification of the high hazard 
areas and infrastructure ranked with high vulnerability and high criticality, the risk to the mobility 
of the state’s residents is reduced; and identifies opportunities for  investments on those areas 
with the greatest impact on improving resiliency.  
 
 A detailed screening based on the  project eligibility criteria in the PROTECT legislation  of all 
projects included in Statewide Transportation Improvement Program (STIP)  was conducted  
utilizing the approved FHWA form  found in Appendix B. In addition, the projects included in the 
Transportation Improvement Programs (TIP)/Metropolitan Transportation Plans (MTP) for each 
Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO) in the state were also screened utilizing the form.   The 
next step in the process is for the projects determined to be eligible through the screening to be 
reviewed by both the GDOT Resiliency Committee and FHWA for concurrence. However, since 
this plan is dynamic and projects will be continuously reviewed and evaluated and new eligible 
projects identified, it is likely that the projects eligible for PROTECT funding will exceed available 
funding and that a system for determining the allocation of PROTECT funding to projects will be 
needed.    
 
As a result, GDOT developed an initial methodology to score projects based on each asset’s 
dynamic risk (product of criticality and dynamic vulnerability) determined using an Asset 
Prioritization Matrix developed by Georgia Tech.  
 
 

--- page 6 ---
        Resilience Improvement Plan  
 
 
5 | P a g e  
 
.  
Source:  Incorporating Resilience Considerations in Transportation Planning, TSMO, and Asset Management Draft Final Report, 
GA Tech 
 
The RIP and associated eligible and prioritized project lists are dynamic and will be updated as 
needed to ensure features such as new data and data sources, new projects, changes in priorities, 
and new guidance are incorporated into future iterations.   
Additionally, GDOT will review the updated STIP to see if there have been any changes to projects 
determined eligible for STIP funding and if those changes affect PROTECT funding eligibility.  
GDOT will also identify new projects that need to be screened, reviewed by the GDOT Resiliency 
Committee for a recommendation, and sent to FHWA for an eligibility determination. GDOT will 
update its project list accordingly. 

--- page 7 ---
        Resilience Improvement Plan  
 
 
6 | P a g e  
 
Definitions 
Adaptive Capacity: Ability of a system to adjust, repair, and respond to damage or disruption. 
Criticality: Importance or value of infrastructure asset, in terms of the cost to users, owners, and 
society from a loss in function.  A critical asset is an asset that is so important to a study area that 
its removal would result in significant losses.2 
Disadvantaged Populations: Populations who belong to disadvantaged communities that are 
affected by high poverty, low wealth, low educational attainment, insufficient local jobs, high 
inequality, and low homeownership. Typically measured at the census tract level, these 
populations can also include people who are historically burdened by lack of access to 
transportation, health care, environmental quality, and economic opportunities, among others.3 
Discretionary Fundin g: Money allocated through an nual appropriations bill s and typically 
assigned to projects via competitive processes such as grant programs.  PROTECT discretionary 
funding is highly competitive and available to entities and projects based on eligibility. 
Executive Order: An official directive from the U.S. president to federal agencies.  
Exposure: Whether an asset or system is in an area experiencing direct effects of extreme 
natural, technological, or human-caused hazards.  
Formula Funding: Federal funds distributed to states by a statutory formula. 
Hazard: A source of potential danger or adverse condition.  
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA)/Bipartisan Infrastructure Law (BIL): A law that 
reauthorizes surface transportation projects for five years and  provides $550 billion over fiscal 
years 2022 through 2026 in new federal funds for infrastructure, with half of that funding going to 
transportation.4 
Metropolitan Transportation Plan  (MTP): A comprehensive blueprint for area transportation 
services aimed at meeting mobility needs through the next 20+ years. 
National Highway Performance Program (NHP P): A program that provides support for the 
condition and performance of the, for the construction of new facilities on the NHS, and to ensure 
that investments of Federal -aid funds in highway construction are directed to support progress 
toward the achievement of performance targets established in a state’s asset management plan 
for the NHS. 
National Highway System (NHS): Roadways important to the nation’s economy, defense, and 
mobility.5 
 
2 Georgia Tech research is based on NCHRP Research Report 970. 
(https://nap.nationalacademies.org/catalog/26125/mainstreaming-system-resilience-concepts-into-
transportation-agencies-a-guide) 
3 SS4A Underserved Communities Census Tracts (Historically Disadvantaged Communities) (arcgis.com)  
4 https://www.phmsa.dot.gov/legislative-mandates/bipartisan-infrastructure-law-bil-infrastructure-investment-
and-jobs-act-iija 
5 https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/planning/national_highway_system/  

--- page 8 ---
        Resilience Improvement Plan  
 
 
7 | P a g e  
 
Natural Hazard: A natural phenomenon that can produce damaging disruptions to systems and 
their functionality, such as hurricanes, flooding, and wind. 
Promoting Resilient Operations for Transformative, Efficient, and Cost -Saving 
Transportation (PROTECT) Program: A program, with both formula and discretionary funding 
sources, initiated through the BIL to make transportation infrastructure more resilient to weather 
events and other natural disasters by focusing on resilience planning, making resilience 
improvements to existing transportation assets and evacuation routes, and addressing at -risk 
highway infrastructure. 
Resilience: The ability to anticipate, prepare for, adapt to changing conditions and withstand, 
respond, and recover rapidly from disruptions. 
Risk: A combination of the likelihood that an asset will experience an extreme event’s impact, 
and the severity or consequence of that impact. Risk can also be defined as the potential for harm 
expressed as the product of the probability and the consequence of an event and often expressed 
in relative term as high, moderate, and low.6  
Sensitivity: Whether the asset may be damaged or disrupted by a stressor.  The more sensitive 
an asset, the more likely it is to be damaged or disrupted by a stressor. 
State Long Range Transportation Plan (SLRTP) : A long-range plan that assesses a state’s 
multimodal transportation system and presents plans for improvement and maintenance. 
Strategic Highway Netwo rk (STRAHNET): The network of highways, including the Interstate 
System that provides connecting routes to military installations, industries, and resources. It is a 
subset of the NHS and important to the United States' strategic defense policy by providing 
defense access, continuity and emergency capabilities for defense purposes. 
Statewide Strategic Transportation Plan (S STP): The SSTP is a state mandated plan that 
includes the overall transportation investment strategies focused on advancing economic growth 
in the state. 
Statewide Transportation Plan (SWTP): The SWTP is a federally required long-range plan that 
assesses the state’s multimodal transportation system and presents plans for improvements and 
maintenance through a minimum horizon of twenty years. 
Statewide Transportation Improvement Program (STIP): The STIP is the state’s four-year 
transportation program that includes all federally funded transportation projects located outside 
of the Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO) boundaries.  Each MPO develops their own 
Transportation Improvement Program (TIP), which are included in the STIP by reference. 
Transportation Asset Management (TA M): A strategic and systematic process of operating, 
maintaining, upgrading, and expanding physical assets effectively throughout their life cycle. It 
focuses on business and engineering practices for resource allocation and utilization, with the 
objective of better decision making based upon quality information and well-defined objectives. 
Transportation Systems Management and Operations ( TSMO): Integrated strategies to 
optimize the performance of existing infrastructure through the implementation of multimodal and 
 
1GDOT 2050 STP/2020 SSTP Resilience Analysis 

--- page 26 ---
        Resilience Improvement Plan  
 
 
25 | P a g e  
 
Tool/Data Agency Description 
Digital Coast NOAA Website that provides coastal data as well as tools, 
training, and information to make the data useful.  Tools 
include Climate Mapping for Resilience and Adaptation 
Assessment Tool, Coastal Resilience Evaluation and Siting 
Tool, and Coastal Change Hazards Portal.  
Climate.data.gov US General 
Services 
Administration 
(GSA) 
Provides data related to climate that can help inform and 
prepare communities, businesses, and citizens.  Also 
includes data and resources related to coastal flooding, 
food resilience, water, ecosystem vulnerability, human 
health, energy infrastructure, and transportation. 
Sea Level Tracker US Army Corps of 
Engineers 
(USACE) 
Shows actual sea level vs. the project sea level change 
and depicts the rate of sea level change currently being 
observed at the selected gauge. 
U.S. Drought 
Portal 
NOAA (NIDIS and 
NCEI) 
The U.S. Drought Portal is a website that serves as a one-
stop shop for data, decision-support products, resources, 
and information on drought. 
North American 
Drought Monitor 
(NADM) 
NOAA A cooperative effort between drought experts in Canada, 
Mexico, and the US to monitor drought across the 
continent.  Updated monthly.   
Vulnerability 
Assessment 
Scoring Tool 
(VAST) 
US Department of 
Transportation 
(US DOT)/FHWA 
An excel based tool used to identify the vulnerability of 
transportation projects based on project type and identified 
environmental stressors.  Vulnerability is determined by the 
exposure, sensitivity, or adaptive capacity of the 
transportation asset. 
National Bridge 
Inventory (NBI) 
FHWA Data on the location, description, classification, and 
general condition of the nation’s bridges located on public 
roads, including interstate highways, state and county 
roads, and publicly accessible bridges on federal and tribal 
lands. 
Overall Condition 
Index (OCI) 
USACE Benchmark used to measure the general condition of 
publicly maintained streets. 
The Climate 
Explorer 
The National 
Environmental 
Modeling and 
Analysis Center 
(NEMAC) at UNC-
Asheville 
Interactive tool that provides graphs, maps, and 
downloadable data of observed and projected climate 
conditions for every county in all 50 states and U.S. 
territories. 
Social 
Vulnerability 
Index (SVI) 
Center for Disease 
Control (CDC) 
Agency for Toxic 
Substances and 
Disease Registry 
(ATSDR) 
A tool that identifies the social vulnerability uses 16 U.S. 
census variables to help local officials identify communities 
that may need support before, during, or after disasters 
Real-time Data United States 
Geological Survey 
(USGS) 
Continuously gathers and measures current conditions 
related to earthquakes, volcanoes, floods, wildland fires, 
landslides, and drought.  
Pipeline Incident 
Database 
Pipeline and 
Hazardous 
Materials Safety 
Administration 
(PHMSA) 
 
 
An extensive, public pipeline database available to states 
and industry to identify and/or assess pipeline and 
underground natural gas storage safety challenges and 
potential solutions. 

--- page 30 ---
        Resilience Improvement Plan  
 
 
29 | P a g e  
 
Figure 8 Projected Future Transportation Infrastructure Costs by Proactive Adaptation 
 
Source:  Climate Trends (globalchange.gov) 
 
To proactively adapt to such temperature/precipitation change and sea level rise, GDOT worked 
with a research team from Georgia Tech to develop a tool that can support decision making based 
on the criticality, vulnerability, and climate risks of the state’s transportation infrastructure and 
assets. This tool is called the multi-hazards exposure, vulnerability, and risk analysis (MHEVRA). 
Vulnerability is a function of asset exposure, asset sensitivity, and adaptive capacity in the tool. 
Vulnerability and criticality in turn determine the level of climate risk. Figure 9 shows relationships 
among these key resilience components. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- page 31 ---
        Resilience Improvement Plan  
 
 
30 | P a g e  
 
Figure 9: Relationship Between Key Resilience Components 
 
 
The following section includes descriptions of the four resiliency factors used to determine 
dynamic risk: 
 
• Asset Exposure 
• Asset Sensitivity 
• Adaptive Capacity 
• Asset Criticality 
 
Asset Exposure 
Asset exposure refers to whether an asset or system is located in an area experiencing direct 
effects of climate variability and extreme weather events.  A multi-hazards exposure index was 
developed based on the cumulative number of major climate/weather-related events that have 
occurred in each county and GDOT district16 and the level of hazard activity by hazard type.  
 
The exposure index is combined from hazard scores resulting from a GIS-based hot spot analysis 
and weights capturing the specific hazards that have the potential to reduce asset performance , 
that is, the hazard-asset pairs that have known failure mechanisms.  
 
Figure 10 shows the results from the hot spot analysis  and Figure 11 shows the hazard-asset 
pairs that have failure mechanisms. Equation 1, found on Page 28, shows how the multi-hazards 
exposure score for pavement is calculated (a similar approach is used for bridges and culverts).  
 
16 The cumulative count of major climate/weather-related events was based on the number of $billion hazard 
events that occurred between 1960-2020.   

--- page 32 ---
        Resilience Improvement Plan  
 
 
31 | P a g e  
 
Figure 10: Climate Hazard Exposure - Score Categories based on Hot Spot Analysis Results 
 
   Source:  Incorporating Resilience Considerations in Transportation Planning, TSMO, and Asset Management Draft Final Report 
Figure 11:  Climate Hazard Exposure - Weights from Hazard-Asset Pairs with Failure Mechanisms 
 
   Source:  Incorporating Resilience Considerations in Transportation Planning, TSMO, and Asset Management Draft Final Report 

--- page 33 ---
        Resilience Improvement Plan  
 
 
32 | P a g e  
 
 
By default, equal weights are assigned to all the hazards that can result in reduced performance 
of a particular asset (that is, pavement, bridge , or culvert). The weights may be modified based 
on the knowledge of local practitioners of the relative importance of specific hazards, as well as 
their interactions, to asset and system performance.  
Asset Sensitivity 
Asset sensitivity refers to  whether the asset may be damaged or disrupted by a stressor. The 
more sensitive an asset, the more likely it is to be damaged or disrupted by a stressor. 
Asset sensitivity was determined by the condition of the asset.  T he condition of pavement was 
determined using the Pavement Condition Index (obtained from GDOT), bridges using the Bridge 
Sufficiency Rating, and culverts using the Culvert Condition Index  (bridge and culvert data was 
obtained from the National Bridge Inventory)17.   
Adaptive Capacity 
Adaptive capacity is the ability of a system to adjust, repair, and respond to damage or disruption. 
Adaptive capacity may be measured in various ways.  In their assessment, the Georgia Tech 
Research Team proposed using a Resilience Rating Tool and Scorecard patterned after the 
World Bank’s Resilience Rating System.18 
It was assumed that all transportation districts were at the beginning stages of building adaptive 
capacity.  As a result,  the Research Team assigned the same unit score to all seven GDOT 
districts.  The Georgia Tech Research Team suggests more detailed self-assessments in the 
future (at the district or local level) that consider various measures of adaptive capacity including 
route redundancy.   
This component is expected to, and should continue to evolve, during future resilience 
assessments. 
Asset Criticality 
Asset criticality refers to the importance or value of infrastructure asset, in terms of the cost to 
users, owners, and society from a loss in function.  
 
17 https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/bridge/nbi.cfm 
18 https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/701011613082635276/pdf/Summary.pdf  

--- page 34 ---
        Resilience Improvement Plan  
 
 
33 | P a g e  
 
The asset criticality score is combined from a score using GDOT State Route Prioritization Criteria 
shown in Figure 12 (and weighted at 80 percent) and the social vulnerability index19 (weighted at 
20 percent) to incorporate social equity considerations into the assessment.  
Figure 12:  Factors for Estimating Criticality Score 
 
   Source:  Incorporating Resilience Considerations in Transportation Planning, TSMO, and Asset Management Draft Final Report 
 
Asset Prioritization 
The Georgia Tech Research Team used a mat rix to prioritize the assets and other system 
elements (e.g., corridors) based on the relative urgency of need for more detailed examination to 
address their general vulnerability to climate events (see Figure 13). The color gradient signifies 
dynamic risk, which is the product of criticality and dynamic vulnerability.   
 
19 The social vulnerability index (SVI) is a tool developed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 
and the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR).  The tool refers to the potential negative 
effects on communities caused by external stresses on human health – including natural or human-caused 
disasters or disease outbreaks.   

--- page 35 ---
        Resilience Improvement Plan  
 
 
34 | P a g e  
 
Figure 13:  Asset Prioritization Matrix 
   
 Source:  Incorporating Resilience Considerations in Transportation Planning, TSMO, and Asset Management Draft Final Report 
Assessment Results 
The RIP relies on a risk -based assessment of the three asset types: (1) bridges, (2) pavement, 
and (3) culverts, which are the main components of the surface transportation system. It aims to 
build resilience by prioritizing investments where the risk is higher to the asset. By doing so, it 
benefits any modes that are running on the surface transportation system, highway or no n-
highway, including transit and rail.  GDOT will continue to explore additional opportunities for 
engaging a broader group of stakeholders (including transit representatives such as MARTA and 
the ATL Authority) in resilience discussions and assessing vulnerabilities of additional asset types 
beyond bridges, pavements, and culverts through the Resiliency Committee.  
The following section summarizes results for vulnerability and risk assessment. 
Vulnerability 
Vulnerability is defined as the degree to which a system is susceptible to, or unable to cope with 
adverse effects of extreme weather events.  In the transportation context, climate vulnerability is 
a function of the transportation system's exposure to climate effects, sensitivity to climate effects, 
and adaptive capacity. 
Based on the analysis, the highest percentage of pavement and culverts  identified as high 
vulnerability are located in northern Georgia in Districts 7, 6, and 1 respectively. The highest 
percentage of bridges identified as high vulnerability are also located in in northern Georgia in 
Districts 6, 7, and 1, respectively (see Figure 14). 

--- page 39 ---
                                                                     Resilience Improvement Plan                                                                                                                                
 
38 | P a g e  
 
Policy and Strategy Recommendations 
As noted in the Existing Resilience Efforts & Policies section, GDOT is already implementing 
many strategies and actions related to resilience as part of its day-to-day operations.  This section 
highlights potential new or additional  strategies GDOT could consider.  These strategies were 
developed in response to the vulnerabilities and potential impacts identified in this plan.   
The strategies address all phases of planning and managing the transportation system from 
planning and project development through design and construction, operations and management, 
emergency management, and into asset management and maintenance.  
Planning 
• Monitor and track how resilience is changing over time  
o Monitor and regularly report resilience performance metrics found in Table 4 on 
the following page 
o Continually identify potential impacts to the transportation system 
o Monitor assets or portions of the transportation system that fall within the 
categories of high vulnerability/low criticality or low vulnerability/high criticality  
o Continue to monitor trends in hazardous events to prepare strategies for 
addressing potential future impacts 
• Fill gaps in data availability or analysis capacity to better address potential impacts to the 
transportation system 
o Analyze assets other than roadways, bridges, and culverts 
o Strengthen adaptative capacity data 
o Incorporate sea level data into the risk assessment  
o Incorporate weather projections into the risk assessment  
• Refer to recommendations in the Incorporating Resilience Considerations in 
Transportation Planning, TSMO, and Asset Management Draft Final Report when 
updating the LRTP, SWTP/SSTP, TAMP, and TSMO Plan 
• Conduct and regularly update the vulnerability assessment included in this plan based 
on updated available evidence based or scientifically proven data and consistent 
standards 
• Incorporate resilience strategies into planning studies and needs assessments  
Project Development  
• Integrate resilience strategies into project alternatives to support purpose  
• Conduct technical analyses of potential hazards as input to the project development 
process   
• Use and build upon the tools developed by Georgia Tech (Adaptive Resilience 
Capability Maturity Model; Flexibility and Agility Scorecards; and a Resilience Rating 
Tool and Scorecard) to self-assess and continue to develop adaptive capacity 
• Consider the possible use of carbon reduction strategies with resilience strategies to 
achieve more sustainable resilience in the longer term  
 
 

--- page 40 ---
                                                                     Resilience Improvement Plan                                                                                                                                
 
39 | P a g e  
 
Design, Materials, and Construction 
• Evaluate project designs considering ability to withstand potential hazards and risks. 
• Evaluate higher-quality and more resilient materials and techniques  
• Look for opportunities to implement natural infrastructure solutions in project designs 
• Evaluate investment strategies that reduce overall operating and response costs to 
hazards  
 
Traffic Operations and Emergency Management 
• Consider hazards and resilience strategies in ITS and TSM&O activities 
• Expand use of technology during major events to collect and share information with 
emergency responders and the public 
• Evaluate and enhance processes, procedures, and projects after hazard events 
• Coordinate to ensure consistency between this plan and state, regional, and local 
emergency management plans 
Asset Management and Maintenance 
• Evaluate infrastructure retrofit and adaptation strategies in Resurfacing, Restoration, and 
Rehabilitation (3R) projects 
• Develop methodologies and tools for analyzing the cost benefits of incorporating 
resilience in asset management activities 
• Utilize more technological capabilities and data in inspections and maintenance of 
transportation infrastructure and assets  
Performance Metrics 
Performance metrics were developed based on the plan goals and baseline metrics established 
from the asset climate and vulnerability and risk assessments completed by Georgia Tech in the 
GDOT resilience re search project.  High vulnerability and critical a ssets were identified and 
rounded to the nearest whole percent.  For example, the percentage of high vulnerability bridges 
is 32% and the target is no more than 30% of the bridges should be in the high vulnerability 
category.  These performance targets are shown in Table 4. 
Table 4: RIP Performance Metrics 
Performance Measure Target 
Percentage of high vulnerability pavement 30% 
Percentage of high vulnerability bridges 30% 
Percentage of high vulnerability culverts 30% 
 
These performance measures are aligned with the foundational, catalytic, and innovation goals 
identified for ensuring a resilient transportation system and maintaining the nation’s leading 
infrastructure system.  With the identification of the high hazard areas and infrastructure with 
ranked with high vulnerability and high criticality, the risk to the mobility of the state’s residents 
is reduced; and ensures investments on those areas with the greatest vulnerability and highest 
criticality are met. 
  

--- page 41 ---
                                                                     Resilience Improvement Plan                                                                                                                                
 
40 | P a g e  
 
Project Screening & Prioritization 
Project Screening 
All projects between FY 2024 and FY 2034 were screened to be included in the RIP to cover all 
projects in the current STIP-X, the 10-year period that covers the STIP (FY 24 – FY 27), TIPs, 
and GDOT’s current Construction Work Program (FY 25 – FY 34). As a result, the list of projects 
included in the RIP should be considered a snapshot in time and will be periodically updated to 
reflect the current need and the goals for resilience. The general screening approach is shown in 
Figure 16 below. 
Figure 16: General Screening Approach 
 
 
Let Responsibility and Regional Priority 
Projects that have yet moved to construction and are let by GDOT are preferred. Additionally, 
Transportation Improvement Act (TIA) projects, projects that are approved for TIA funding by the 
participating regional commissions, are omitted. These projects are considered regional priorities 
that already have dedicated funding. 

--- page 42 ---
                                                                     Resilience Improvement Plan                                                                                                                                
 
41 | P a g e  
 
Primary Work Type 
The RIP gives a higher priority to projects 
whose primary purpose is to maintain and 
rehabilitate transportation assets. These 
projects are listed in “Tier 1 .” Projects in “Tier 
2,” which involve  capacity and operational 
improvements, need to be on an evacuation 
route to be considered eligible.  Figure 17 
shows Tier 1 and Tier 2 work type categories 
used in the screening process. 
Due to a large number of bridge projects, only 
those that are unlet and that were identified by 
the Office of Bridge Design and Maintenance 
for the PROTECT funding were included. 
  
Further Assessment 
This step further evaluates projects based on their locations such as coastal counties and FEMA 
floodplain information to assist in prioritizing investment and/or in applying for PROTECT funding 
using the FHWA PROTECT Eligibility Screening Form. 
 
Assessment of Criticality, Vulnerability, and Risk based on Project Locations 
o Use the Multi-Hazards Exposure, Vulnerability and Risk Assessment (MHEVRA) tool 
where data is available. 
o Prioritize projects using the tool (priority based on criticality/vulnerability/risk) or project 
types where data is not available from the tool. 
Including FEMA Flood Zone information: 
o 1% Annual Chance of Flood Hazard (100-year Floodplain) 
o 0.2% Annual Chance of Flood Hazard (500-year Floodplain) 
 
Table 5 shows the list of projects recommended for PROTECT funding under the Resilience 
Improvement Plan as of October 2024. 
 
This screening process excludes projects that were already approved for PROTECT funding by 
FHWA in FY 23 and FY 24 (Table 6). 
Figure 17:  Primary Work Types Screening Tiers 
 
Tier 2Tier 1
Passing LanesBridges
WideningShoulder Work
Interchange Slope Repair
Turn Lanes Resurface & Maintenance
Signals Grade, Drain, Base & Surface
Intersection ImprovementPavement Rehabilitation
ITSDrainage Improvements
Widening and ResurfacingCurb & Gutter
Culvert
Concrete Rehabilitation

--- page 48 ---
                                                                                                 Resilience Improvement Plan                                                                                                                                
 
47 | P a g e  
 
Table 6.  Projects Approved for PROTECT funding by FHWA as of October 2024  
No. Project 
ID 
Description Primary 
Work Type 
County GDOT 
District 
Eligibility Type Asset 
Type 
Approved Amount Federal 
Cost Share 
1 0007055 SR 180 @ SLAUGHTER CREEK Bridges Union 1 Resilience Improvement Bridge $1,084,329.00  Incremental 
2 0015541 SR 58 @ SQUIRREL TOWN CREEK 4 MI NE OF TRENTON Bridges Dade 6 Resilience Improvement Bridge $1,655,706.00  Incremental 
3 0013717 SR 54 @ BEAR CREEK 3.5 MI SE OF MORELAND Bridges Coweta 3 Resilience Improvement Bridge $1,390,196.00  Incremental 
4 0015557 SR 8/SR 174 @ HUDSON RIVER 8.8 MI N OF DANIELSVILLE Bridges Franklin 1 Resilience Improvement Bridge $1,009,224.65  Incremental 
5 0015621 CR 454/LAMBS BRIDGE ROAD @ CANOOCHEE CREEK NE OF SWAINSBORO Bridges Emanuel 2 Resilience Improvement Bridge $984,000.00  Incremental 
6 0015540 SR 7/US 41 @ CEDAR CREEK 1.5 MI S OF CORDELE Bridges Crisp 4 Resilience Improvement Bridge $783,841.86  Incremental 
7 0015611 VANILLA LANE @ BIG TURNIPTOWN CREEK 4.9 MI NE OF ELLIJAY Bridges Gilmer 6 Resilience Improvement Bridge $300,221.24  Incremental 
8 0015622 CR 454/LAMBS BRIDGE RD@LITTLE CANOOCHEE CRK NE OF SWAINSBORO Bridges Emanuel 2 Resilience Improvement Bridge $1,572,246.84  Incremental 
9 M006391 SR 40 FROM W OF CS 599/KINGS BAY ROAD TO E OF SR 40 SPUR Resurface & 
Maintenance 
Camden 5 Community Resilience & Evacuation 
Route 
Roadway $2,641,112.63  Full 
10 0019359 SR 144 SPUR @ OGEECHEE RIVER Bridges Bryan 5 At-Risk Coastal Infrastructure Bridge $10,075,000.00  Full 
11 0013719 SR 38/US 84 @ DOCTORS CREEK 3 MI E OF LUDOWICI Bridges Long 5 Resilience Improvement Bridge $1,647,848.00  Incremental 
12 0013738 SR 25 @ WHITEOAK CREEK 5 MI N OF WOODBINE Bridges Camden 5 Resilience Improvement Bridge $786,660.00  Incremental 
13 0015601 CR 133/EBENEZER ROAD @ MUCKALEE CREEK 7.5 MI W OF ELLAVILLE Bridges Schley 3 Resilience Improvement Bridge $987,874.00  Incremental 
14 0015615 CR 422/JEFF DAVIS ROAD @ TEN MILE CREEK 2 MI NW OF THOMASTON Bridges Upson 3 Resilience Improvement Bridge $800,000.00  Incremental 
15 0014072 I-16 EB & WB @ WALNUT CREEK 1 MI E OF MACON Bridges Bibb 3 Resilience Improvement; Community 
Resilience and Evacuation Route Project 
Bridge $17,017,539.00  Full 
16 0015641 CR 305/TYRE BRIDGE RD @ SIXTY FOOT CREEK N OF PATTERSON CITY Bridges Pierce 5 Resilience Improvement Bridge $448,000.00  Incremental 
 